When the spring was in its mid-term and the apple trees entirely white they would walk down by the river, talking as they went, their voices hardly distinguishable from the voices of birds or waters. Their love had begun with the winter; they were both in their first youth. Those who watched them made various prophecies—none of which was fulfilled—laughed, criticized, or were sentimental according to the turn of their minds. But these two were ignorant of the watching and, if they had heard the prophecies, they would hardly have understood them.
Between them and the world was a wall of glass—between them and time was a wall of glass—they were not conscious of being either young or old. The weather passed over them as over a field or a stream—it was there but they took no account of it. There was love and being alive, there was the beating of the heart, apart or together. This had been, this would be, this was—it was impossible to conceive of a world created otherwise. He knew the shape of her face, in dreams and out of them; she could shut her eyes, alone, and feel his hands on her shoulders. So it went, so they spoke and answered, so they walked by the river. Later on, once or twice, they tried to remember what they had said—a great deal of nonsense?—but the words were already gone. They could hear the river running; he could remember a skein of hair; she, a blue shirt open at the throat and an eager face. Then, after a while, these two were not often remembered.
All this had been a number of years ago. But now that the old man had returned at last to the place where he had been born, he would often go down to the river-field. Sometimes a servant or a grandchild would carry the light camp chair and the old brown traveling-rug; more often he would go alone. He was still strong—he liked to do for himself; there was no use telling him he’d catch his death walking through the wet grass, it only set him in his ways.
When at last he had reached his goal—a certain ancient apple tree whose limbs were entirely crooked with bearing—he would set the chair under it, sit down, wrap his legs in the rug, and remain there till he was summoned to come in. He was alone but not lonely; if anyone passed by he would talk; if no one passed he was content to be silent. There was almost always a book in his lap, but he very seldom read it; his own life, after all, was the book that suited him best, it did not grow dull with rereading. There is little to add, he thought, little to add; but he was not sorry. The text remained; it was a long text, and many things that had seemed insignificant and obscure in the living took on sudden clarities and significances, now he remembered.
Yes, he thought, that is how most people live their actual lives—skimming it through, in a hurry to get to the end and find out who got married and who got rich. Well, that’s something that can’t be helped. But when you know the end you can turn back and try to find out the story. Only most people don’t want to, he thought, and smiled. Looks too queer to suit them—reading your own book backwards. But it’s a great pleasure to me. He relaxed, let his hands lie idle in his lap, let the pictures drift before his eyes.
The picture of the boy and girl by the river. He could stand off from it now and regard it, without sorrow or longing; no ghost cried in his flesh because of it, though it was a part of that flesh and with that flesh would die. And yet, for a moment, he had almost been in the old mood again, recovered the old ecstasy. Whatever love was, he had been in love at that time. But what was love?

They met by stealth because of reasons no longer important; it lasted through all of one long dry summer in the small town that later became a city. Outside, the street baked, the white dust blew up and down, but it was fresh and pleasant in the house.
She was a dark-haired woman, a widow, some years older than he—he was a young man in a tall collar, his face not yet lined or marked but his body set in the pattern which it would keep. Her name was Stella. She had a cool voice, sang sometimes; they talked a great deal. They made a number of plans which were not accomplished—they were hotly in love.
He remembered being with her one evening toward the end of summer, in the trivial room. On the table was a bowl of winesaps—he had been teasing her about them—she said she liked the unripened color best. They talked a little more, then she grew silent; her face, turned toward his, was white in the dusk.
That autumn an accident took him away from the town. When he came back, a year later, she had moved to another state. Later he heard that she had married again, and the name of the man. A great while later he read of her death.
The old man’s rug had slipped from his knees; he gathered it up again and tucked it around him. He could not quite get back into the man who had loved and been loved by Stella, but he could not escape him, either. He saw that youth and the boy who had walked by the river. Each had a woman by his side, each stared at the other hostilely, each, pointing to his own companion, said, “This is love.” He smiled a trifle dubiously at their frowning faces—both were so certain—and yet he included them both. Which was right, which wrong? He puzzled over the question but could come to no decision. And if neither were right—or both—why then, what was love?
You certainly strike some queer things when you read the book backwards, he thought. I guess I’d better call it a day and quit. But, even as he thought so, another picture arose.
They had been married for a little more than two years, their first child was eight months old. He was a man in his thirties, doing well, already a leader in the affairs of the growing town. She was five years younger, tall for a woman; she had high color in those days. They had known comparatively little of each other before their marriage—indeed, had not been very deeply in love; but living together had changed them.
He came back to the house on Pine Street, told the news of his day, heard about the neighbors, the errands, the child. After dinner they sat in the living room, he smoked and read the newspaper, she had sewing in her lap. They talked to each other in snatches; when their eyes met, something went, something came. At ten o’clock she went upstairs to feed the child; he followed some time later. The child was back in its crib again; they both looked at her a moment—sleep already lay upon her like a visible weight—how deeply, how swiftly she sank towards sleep! They went out, shut the door very softly, stood for a moment in the hallway, and embraced. Then the woman released herself.
“I’m going to bed now, Will,” she said. “Be sure and turn out the lights when you come up.”
“I won’t be long,” he said. “It’s been a long day.”
He stretched his arms, looking at her. She smiled deeply, turned away. The door of their room shut behind her.
When he had extinguished the lights and locked the doors he went up to the long garret that stretched the whole length of the house. They had had the house only two years, but the garret had already accumulated its collection of odds and ends; there were various discarded or crippled objects that would never be used again, that would stay here till the family moved, till someone died. But what he had come to see was a line of apples mellowing on a long shelf, in the dusty darkness. They had been sent in from the farm—you could smell their faint, unmistakable fragrance from the doorway. He took one up, turned it over in his hand, felt its weight and texture, firm and smooth and cool. You couldn’t get a better eating apple than that, and this was the right place for them to mellow.
Mary’s face came before him, looking at him in the hallway; the thought of it was like the deep stroke of a knife that left, as it struck, no pain. Yes, he thought, I’m alive—we’re pretty fond of each other. Some impulse made him put down the apple and push up the little skylight of the garret to let the air blow in on his face. It was a clean cold—it was autumn; it made the blood run in him to feel it. He stood there for several minutes, drinking in cold autumn, thinking about his wife. Then at last he shut the skylight and went downstairs to their room.

A third couple had joined the others under the tree, a third image asserted itself, by every settled line in its body, the possessor not only of a woman but of a particular and unmistakable knowledge. The old man observed one and all, without envy but curiously. If they could only get to talking with one another, he thought, why then, maybe, we’d know something. But they could not do it—it was not in the cards. All each could do was to make an affirmation, “This is love.”
The figures vanished, he was awake again. When you were old you slept lightly but more often, and these dreams came. Mary had been dead ten years; their children were men and women. He had always expected Mary to outlive him, but things had not happened so. She would have been a great comfort. Yet when he thought of her dead, though his grief was real, it came to him from a distance. He and she were nearer together than he and grief. And yet if he met her again it would be strange.
The flower came out on the branch, the fruit budded and grew. At last it fell or was picked, and the thing started over again. You could figure out every process of growth and decline, but that did not get you any nearer the secret. Only, he’d like to know.
He turned his eyes toward the house—somebody coming for him. His eyes were still better for far-away things than near, and he made out the figure quite plainly. It was the girl who had married his grandnephew, Robert. She called him “Father Hancock” or “Gramp” like the rest of them, but still, she was different from the rest.
For a moment her name escaped him. Then he had it. Jenny. A dark-haired girl, pleasant spoken, with a good free walk to her—girls stepped out freer, on the whole, than they had in his day. As for cutting their hair and the rest of it—well, why shouldn’t they? It was only the kind of people who wrote to newspapers who made a fuss about such things. And they always had to make a fuss about something. He chuckled deeply, wondering what a newspaper would make of it if a highly respected old citizen wrote and asked them what was love. “Crazy old fool—ought to be in an asylum.” Well, maybe at that, they’d be right.
He watched the girl coming on as he would have watched a rabbit run through the grass or a cloud march along the sky. There was something in her walk that matched both rabbit and cloud—something light and free and unbroken. But there was something else in her walk as well.
“Lunch, Father Hancock!” she called while she was still some yards away. “Snapper beans and black-cherry pie!”
“Well, I’m hungry,” said the old man. “You know me, Jenny—never lost appetite yet. But you can have my slice of the pie; you’ve got younger teeth than mine.”
“Stop playing you’re a centenarian, Father Hancock,” said the girl. “I’ve seen you with Aunt Maria’s pies before.”
“I might take a smidgin’, at that,” said the old man reflectively, “just to taste. But you can have all I don’t eat, Jenny—and that’s a fair offer.”
“It’s too fair,” said the girl. “I’d eat you out of house and home to-day.” She stretched her arms toward the sky. “Gee, I feel hungry!” she said.
“It’s right you should,” said the old man, placidly. “And don’t be ashamed of your dinner either. Eat solid and keep your strength up.”
“Do I look as if I needed to keep my strength up?” she said with a laugh.
“No. But it’s early to tell,” said the old man, gradually disentangling himself from his coverings. He stood up, declining her offered hand. “Thank you, my dear,” he said. “I never expected to see my own great-grandnephew. But don’t be thinking of that. It’ll be your baby, boy or girl, and that’s what’s important.”
The girl’s hand went slowly to her throat while color rose in her face. Then she laughed.
“Father Hancock!” she said. “You—you darned old wizard! Why Robert doesn’t know about it yet and——”
“He wouldn’t,” said the old man briefly. “Kind of inexperienced at that age. But you can’t fool me, my dear. I’ve seen too much and too many.”
She looked at him with trouble in her eyes.
“Well, as long as you know . . .” she said. “But you won’t let on to the rest of them . . . of course I’ll tell Robert soon, but——”
“I know,” said the old man. “They carry on. Never could see so much sense in all that carrying on, but relations do. And being the first great-grandchild. No, I won’t tell ’em. And I’ll be as surprised as Punch when they finally tell me.”
“You’re a good egg,” said the girl gratefully. “Thanks ever so much. I don’t mind your knowing.”
They stood for a moment in silence, his hand on her shoulder. The girl shivered suddenly.
“Tell me, Father Hancock,” she said suddenly, in a muffled voice, not looking at him, “is it going to be pretty bad?”
“No, child, it won’t be so bad.” She said nothing, but he could feel the tenseness in her body relax.
“It’ll be for around November, I expect?” he said, and went on without waiting for her reply. “Well, that’s a good time, Jenny. You take our old cat, Marcella—she generally has her second lot of kittens around in October or November. And those kittens, they do right well.”
“Father Hancock! You’re a positive disgrace!” So she said, but he knew from the tone of her voice that she was not angry with him and once more, as they went together towards the house, he felt the stroke of youth upon him, watching her walk so well.

About the middle of summer, when the green of the fields had turned to yellow and brown, Will Hancock’s old friend John Sturgis drove over one day to visit him.
A son and a granddaughter accompanied John Sturgis, as well as two other vaguer female relatives whom the young people called indiscriminately “Cousin” and “Aunt”; and for a while the big porch of the Hancock house knew the bustle of tribal ceremony. Everyone was a little anxious, everyone was a little voluble; this was neither a funeral nor a wedding but, as an occasion, it ranked with those occasions, and in the heart of every Hancock and Sturgis present was a small individual grain of gratitude and pride at being there to witness the actual meeting of two such perishable old men.
The relatives possessed the old men and displayed them. The old men sat quietly, their tanned hands resting on their knees. They knew they were being possessed, but they too felt pride and pleasure. It was, after all, remarkable that they should be here. The young people didn’t know how remarkable it was.
Finally, however, Will Hancock rose.
“Come along down-cellar, John,” he said gruffly. “Got something to show you.”
It was the familiar opening of an immemorial gambit. And it brought the expected reply.
“Now, father,” said Will Hancock’s eldest daughter, “if you’ll only wait a minute, Maria will be out with the lemonade, and I had her bake some brownies.”
“Lemonade!” said Will Hancock and sniffed. “Hold your tongue, Mary,” he said gently. “I’m going to give John Sturgis something good for what ails him.”
As he led the way down-cellar he smiled to himself. They would be still protesting, back on the porch. They would be saying that cellars were damp and old men delicate, that cider turned into acid, and that at their age you’d think they’d have more sense. But there would be no real heart in the protestations. And if the ceremonial visit to the cellar had been omitted there would have been disappointment. Because then their old men would not have been quite so remarkable, after all.
They passed through the dairy-cellar, with its big tin milk-pans, and into the cider-cellar. It was cool there but with a sweet-smelling coolness; there was no scent of damp or mold. Three barrels stood in a row against the wall; on the floor was a yellow patch of light. Will Hancock took a tin cup from a shelf and silently tapped the farthest barrel. The liquid ran in the cup. It was old cider, yellow as wheat-straw, and when he raised it toward his nostrils the soul of the bruised apple came to him.
“Take a seat, John,” he said, passing over the full cup. His friend thanked him and sank into the one disreputable armchair. Will Hancock filled another cup and sat down upon the middle barrel.
“Well, here’s to crime, John!” he said. It was the time-honored phrase.
“Mud in your eye!” said John Sturgis fiercely. He sipped the cider.
“Ah!” he said, “tastes better every year, Will.”
“She ought to, John. She’s goin’ along with us.”
They both sat silent for a time, sipping appreciatively, their worn eyes staring at each other, taking each other in. Each time they met again now was a mutual triumph for both; they looked forward to each time and back upon it, but they had known each other so long that speech had become only a minor necessity between them.
“Well,” said John Sturgis at last, when the cups had been refilled, “I hear you got some more expectations in your family, Will. That’s fine.”
“That’s what they tell me,” said Will Hancock. “She’s a nice girl, Jenny.”
“Yes, she’s a nice girl,” said John Sturgis indifferently. “It’ll be some news for Molly when I get home. She’ll be right interested. She was hopin’ we might beat you to it, with young Jack and his wife. But no signs yet.”
He shook his head and a shadow passed over his face.
“Well, I don’t know that you set so much store by it,” said Will Hancock consolingly, “though it’s interesting.”
“Oh, they’ll have a piece in the paper,” said John Sturgis with a trace of bitterness. “Four generations. Even if it isn’t a great-grandchild, so to speak. I know ’em.” He took a larger sip of cider.
“That won’t do me a speck of good when I get home,” he confided. “And Molly, she’ll think I was crazy. But what’s the use of livin’ if you’ve got to live so tetchy all the time?”
“I never saw you looking better, John,” said Will Hancock, heartily. “Never did.”
“I’m spry enough most days,” admitted John Sturgis. “And as for you, you look like a four-year-old. But it’s the winter——”
He left the sentence uncompleted, and both fell silent for a moment, thinking of the coming winter. Winter, the foe of old men.
At last John Sturgis leaned forward. His cheeks had a ghost of color in them now, his eyes an unexpected brightness.
“Tell me, Will,” he said, eagerly, “you and me—we’ve seen a good deal in our time. Well, tell me this—just how do you figure it all out?”
Will Hancock could not pretend to misunderstand the question. Nor could he deny his friend the courtesy of a reply.
“I haven’t a notion,” he said at last, slowly and gravely. “I’ve thought about it, Lord knows—but I haven’t a notion, John.”
The other sank back into his chair, disappointedly.
“Well now, that’s too bad,” he grumbled, “for I’ve been thinkin’ about it. Seems to me as if I didn’t do much else *but* think most of the time. But you’re the educated one; and if you haven’t a notion—well——”
His eyes stared into space, without fear or anger, but soberly. Will Hancock tried to think of some way to help his friend.
He saw again before him those three figures under the apple tree, each a part of himself, each with a woman beside it, each saying, “This is love.” Now, as he fell into reverie, a fourth couple joined them—an old man, still erect, and a girl who still walked with a light step though her body was heavy now.
He stared at these last visitors, incredulously at first, and then with a little smile. Nearly every day of the summer Jenny had come to call him when he sat under his tree. He could see her looking across the gulf that separated them—and finding things not so bad as she had thought they might be. Why, I might have been an old tree myself, he thought. Or an old rock you went out to when you wanted to be alone.
There had been her relatives and his. There had been all the women. But it was to him that she had come. To the others he was and would be “Father Hancock” and their own remarkable old man. But Jenny was not really one of his own; and because of that she had from him a certain calming wisdom that he did not know he possessed.
He heard an insect cry in the deep grass and smelled the smell of the hay, the smell of summer days. Love? It was not love, of course, nor could be, by any stretch of language. To her it had been summer and an old tree; and to him, he knew what it had been. He was fond of her, naturally, but that was not the answer. It was not she who had moved him. But for an instant, on the cords of the defeated flesh, he had heard a note struck clearly, the vibration of a single and silver wire. As he thought of this, the wire vibrated anew, the imperishable accent rang. Then it was mute—it would not be struck again.
“I tried to figure it out the other day,” he said to John Sturgis, “what love was, first. But——”
Then he stopped. It was useless. John Sturgis was his old friend, but there was no way to tell John Sturgis the thoughts in his mind.
“It’s funny your sayin’ that,” said John Sturgis reflectively. “You know I came back to the house the other day, and there was Molly asleep in the chair. I was scared for a minute but then I saw she was sleeping. Only she didn’t wake up right away—I guess I came in light. Well, I stood there looking at her. You came to our golden wedding, Will; but her cheeks were pink and she looked so pretty in her sleep. I just went over and kissed her, like an old fool. Now what makes a man act like that?”
He paused for a moment.
“It’s so blame’ hard to figure out,” he said. “When you’re young you’ve got the strength but you haven’t got the time. And when you’re old you’ve got time enough, but I’m always goin’ to sleep.”
He drained the last drop in his cup and rose.
“Well, Sam’ll be lookin’ for me,” he said. “It was good cider.”
As they passed through the dairy a black, whiskered face appeared at the small barred window and vanished guiltily at the sound of Will Hancock’s voice.
“That old cat’s always trying to get in to the milk,” he said. “She ought to take shame on her, all the kittens she’s had. But I guess this’ll be her last litter, this fall. She’s getting on.”
The tribal ceremonies of departure were drawing toward a close. Will Hancock shook John Sturgis’ hand.
“Come over again, John, and bring along Molly next time,” he said. “There’s always a drop in the barrel.”
“And it’s a prize drop,” said John Sturgis. “Thank you, Will. But I don’t figure on gettin’ over again this summer. Next spring, maybe.”
“Sure,” said Will. But between them both, as they knew, lay the shadow of the cold months, the shadow to be lived through. Will Hancock watched his friend being helped into the car, watched the car drive away. “John’s beginning to go,” he thought with acceptance. “And that’s probably just what John’s telling Sam about me.”
He turned back toward his family. He was tired, but he could not give in. The family clustered about him, talking and questioning. John’s visit had made him, for the moment, an even more remarkable old man than ever; and he must play his role for the rest of them, worthily, now John had gone. So he played it, and they saw no difference. But he kept wondering what day the winter would set in.

The first gales of autumn had come and passed; when Will Hancock got up in the morning he saw white rime on the ground. It had melted away by eleven, but next morning it was back again. At last, when he walked down to his apple tree he walked under bare boughs.
That night he went early to his room, but before he got in bed he stood for a while at the window, looking at the sky. It was a winter sky, the stars were hard in it. Yet the day had been mild enough. Jenny wanted her child born in the Indian Summer. Perhaps she would still have her wish.
He slept more lightly than ever these nights—the first thing roused him. So when the noises began in the house he was awake at once. But he lay there for some time, dreamily, not even looking at his watch. The footsteps went up and down stairs, and he listened to them; a voice said something sharply and was hushed; somebody was trying to telephone. He knew them all, those sounds of whispering haste that wake up a house at night.
Yes, he thought, all the same it’s hard on the women. Or the men too, for that matter. But sooner or later, the doctor would come and take from his small black bag the miraculous doll wrapped up in the single cabbage leaf. He himself had once been such a doll, though he couldn’t remember it. Now they would not want him out there, but he would go all the same.
He rose, put on his dressing-gown, and tiptoed down the long corridor. He heard a shrill whisper in his ear, “*Father!* Are you *crazy*? Go back to *bed*!” But he shook his head at the whisper and went on. At the head of the stairs he met his grandnephew, Robert. There was sweat on the boy’s face and he breathed as if he had been running. They looked at each other a moment, with sympathy but without understanding.
“How is she?” said Will Hancock.
“All right, thanks, Gramp,” said the boy in a grateful voice as he kept fumbling in his dressing-gown pocket for a cigarette that was not there. “The doctor’s coming over but we—we don’t think it’s the real thing yet.”
Someone called to the boy, and he disappeared again. The corridor abruptly seemed very full of Will Hancock’s family. They were clustering around him, buzzing reassuringly, but he paid little attention.
Suddenly, from behind a closed door, he heard Jenny’s voice, clear and amused. “Why how perfectly sweet of Father Hancock, Bob! But I’m sorry they woke him—and all for a false alarm.”
The reassuring buzzes around him recommenced. He shook them off impatiently and walked back toward his room. But when he was hidden from the others he gave a single guilty look behind him and made for the back stairs. They won’t follow me, he thought; got too much to talk about.
He switched on the light in the cider-cellar, drawing his dressing-gown closer about him. It was cold in the cellar now and it would be colder still. But cider was always cider, and he felt thirsty.
He drank the yellow liquid reflectively, swinging his heels against the side of the barrel. Upstairs they would still be whispering and consulting. And maybe the doctor would come with his black bag after all, and to-morrow there would be a piece in the paper to make John Sturgis jealous. But there wasn’t anything he could do about it.
No, even for Jenny, there was nothing more he could do. She had taken his wisdom, such as it was, and used it. And he was glad of that. But now he knew from the light tone of her voice that she was beyond such wisdom as he had. The wire had ceased its vibration, the leaves of the tree were shed, like dry wisdom on the ground. Well, she was a nice girl and Robert a decent boy. They would have other children doubtless, and those children children in their turn.
He heard a low sound from the other corner of the cellar and went over to see what had made it. Then he whistled. “Well, old lady,” he said, “you certainly don’t waste your time.” It was the old black house-cat who had stared through the dairy window at himself and John Sturgis. Already she was licking the third of her new kittens while the two first-born nuzzled at her, squeaking from time to time.
He bent over and stroked her head. She looked at him troubledly. “It’s all right,” he said reassuringly. “They’ve forgotten about us both—and no wonder. But I’ll stick around.”
He refilled his cup and sat down upon the barrel, swinging his heels. There was nothing here that he could do, either—cats were wiser than humans in such matters. But, nevertheless, he would stay.
As the cider sank in the cup and he grew colder he fell into a waking dream. Now and then he went over to stroke the cat, but he did it automatically. He was here, in a bare old cellar, drinking cider which would doubtless disagree with him, and in all probability catching his death of cold. And upstairs, perhaps, were life and death and the doctor—new life fighting to come into the world and death waiting a chance to seize it as it came, as death always did. Moreover, these lives and deaths were his lives and deaths, after a fashion, for he was part of their chain. But, for the moment, he was disconnected from them. He was beyond life and death.
He saw again, in front of him, the three couples of his first dream—and himself and Jenny—himself giving Jenny, unconsciously, the wisdom he did not know. “This is love—this is love—this is love—” and so it was, each phase of it, for each man there spoke the truth of his own heart. Then he looked at the apple tree and saw that it was in flower, but fruit hung on it as well, green fruit and ripe, and even as he looked a wind was blowing the last leaves from the bare bough.
He shivered a little, he was very cold. He put his cup back on the shelf and went over for a last look at the old cat. The travail was over—she lay on her side, beset by the new-born. There was green, inexplicable light in her eyes as he stooped over her, and when he patted her head she stretched one paw out over her kittens like an arm.
He rose stiffly and left her, turning out the light. As he went up the stairs, “Adorable life,” he thought, “I know you. I know you were given only to be given away.”
The house was silent again, as he tiptoed back to his room. His vigil had been unsuspected, his watch quite useless; and yet he had kept a vigil and a watch. To-morrow might have been too late for it—even now he trembled with cold. Yet, when he stood before the window, he looked long at the winter sky. The stars were still hard points of light, and he would not see them soft again, but earth would continue to turn round, in spite of all these things.