Yes, I guess I have put on weight since you last saw me—not that you’re any piker yourself, Spike. But I suppose you medicos have to keep in shape—probably do better than we downtown. I try to play golf in the week-ends, and I do a bit of sailing. But four innings of the baseball game at reunion was enough for me. I dropped out, after that, and let Art Corliss pitch.
You really should have been up there. After all, the Twentieth is quite a milestone—and the class is pretty proud of its famous man. What was it that magazine article said: “most brilliant young psychiatrist in the country”? I may not know psychiatry from marbles, but I showed it to Lisa, remarking that it was old Spike Garrett, and for once she was impressed. She thinks brokers are pretty dumb eggs. I wish you could stay for dinner—I’d like to show you the apartment and the twins. No, they’re Lisa’s and mine. Boys, if you’ll believe it. Yes, the others are with Sally—young Barbara’s pretty grown up, now.
Well, I can’t complain. I may not be famous like you, Spike, but I manage to get along, in spite of the brain trusters, and having to keep up the place on Long Island. I wish you got East oftener—there’s a pretty view from the guest house, right across the Sound—and if you wanted to write a book or anything, we’d know enough to leave you alone. Well, they started calling me a partner two years ago, so I guess that’s what I am. Still fooling them, you know. But, seriously, we’ve got a pretty fine organization. We run a conservative business, but we’re not all stuffed shirts, in spite of what the radicals say. As a matter of fact, you ought to see what the boys ran about us in the last Bawl Street Journal. Remind me to show it to you.
But it’s your work I want to hear about—remember those bull-sessions we used to have in Old Main? Old Spike Garrett, the Medical Marvel! Why, I’ve even read a couple of your books, you old horse thief, believe it or not! You got me pretty tangled up on all that business about the id and the ego, too. But what I say is, there must be something in it if a fellow like Spike Garrett believes it. And there is, isn’t there? Oh, I know you couldn’t give me an answer in five minutes. But as long as there’s a system—and the medicos know what they’re doing.
I’m not asking for myself, of course—remember how you used to call me the 99 per-cent normal man? Well, I guess I haven’t changed. It’s just that I’ve gotten to thinking recently, and Lisa says I go around like a bear with a sore head. Well, it isn’t that. I’m just thinking. A man has to think once in a while. And then, going back to reunion brought it all up again.
What I mean is this—the thing seemed pretty clear when we were in college. Of course, that was back in ’15, but I can remember the way most of us thought. You fell in love with a girl and married her and settled down and had children and that was that. I’m not being simple-minded about it—you knew people get divorced, just as you knew people died, but it didn’t seem something that was likely to happen to you. Especially if you came from a small Western city, as I did. Great Scott, I can remember when I was just a kid and the Prentisses got divorced. They were pretty prominent people and it shook the whole town.
That’s why I want to figure things out for my own satisfaction. Because I never expected to be any Lothario—I’m not the type. And yet Sally and I got divorced and we’re both remarried, and even so, to tell you the truth, things aren’t going too well. I’m not saying a word against Lisa. But that’s the way things are. And it isn’t as if I were the only one. You can look around anywhere and see it, and it starts you wondering.
I’m not going to bore you about myself and Sally. Good Lord, you ushered at the wedding, and she always liked you. Remember when you used to come out to the house? Well, she hasn’t changed—she’s still got that little smile—though, of course, we’re all older. Her husband’s a doctor, too—that’s funny, isn’t it?—and they live out in Montclair. They’ve got a nice place there and he’s very well thought of. We used to live in Meadowfield, remember?
I remember the first time I saw her after she married McConaghey—oh, we’re perfectly friendly, you know. She had on red nail polish and her hair was different, a different bob. And she had one of those handbags with her new initials on it. It’s funny, the first time, seeing your wife in clothes you don’t know. Though Lisa and I have been married eight years, for that matter, and Sally and I were divorced in ’28.
Of course, we have the children for part of the summer. We’ll have Barbara this summer—Bud’ll be in camp. It’s a little difficult sometimes, but we all cooperate. You have to. And there’s plenty to do on Long Island in the summer, that’s one thing. But they and Lisa get along very well—Sally’s brought them up nicely that way. For that matter, Doctor McConaghey’s very nice when I see him. He gave me a darn good prescription for a cold and I get it filled every winter. And Jim Blake—he’s Lisa’s first husband—is really pretty interesting, now we’ve got to seeing him again. In fact, we’re all awfully nice—just as nice and polite as we can be. And sometimes I get to wondering if it mightn’t be a good idea if somebody started throwing fits and shooting rockets, instead. Of course I don’t really mean that.
You were out for a week end with us in Meadowfield—maybe you don’t remember it—but Bud was about six months old then and Barbara was just running around. It wasn’t a bad house, if you remember the house. Dutch Colonial, and the faucet in the pantry leaked. The landlord was always fixing it, but he never quite fixed it right. And you had to cut hard to the left to back into the garage. But Sally liked the Japanese cherry tree and it wasn’t a bad house. We were going to build on Rose Hill Road eventually. We had the lot picked out, if we didn’t have the money, and we made plans about it. Sally never could remember to put in the doors in the plan, and we laughed about that.
It wasn’t anything extraordinary, just an evening. After supper, we sat around the lawn in deck chairs and drank Sally’s beer—it was long before Repeal. We’d repainted the deck chairs ourselves the Sunday before and we felt pretty proud of them. The light stayed late, but there was a breeze after dark, and once Bud started yipping and Sally went up to him. She had on a white dress, I think—she used to wear white a lot in the summers—it went with her blue eyes and her yellow hair. Well, it wasn’t anything extraordinary—we didn’t even stay up late. But we were all there. And if you’d told me that within three years we’d both be married to other people, I’d have thought you were raving.
Then you went West, remember, and we saw you off on the train. So you didn’t see what happened, and, as a matter of fact, it’s hard to remember when we first started meeting the Blakes. They’d moved to Meadowfield then, but we hadn’t met them.
Jim Blake was one of those pleasant, ugly-faced people with steel glasses who get right ahead in the law and never look young or old. And Lisa was Lisa. She’s dark, you know, and she takes a beautiful burn. She was the first girl there to wear real beach things or drink a special kind of tomato juice when everybody else was drinking cocktails. She was very pretty and very good fun to be with—she’s got lots of ideas. They entertained a good deal because Lisa likes that—she had her own income, of course. And she and Jim used to bicker a good deal in public in an amusing way—it was sort of an act or seemed like it. They had one little girl, Sylvia, that Jim was crazy about. I mean it sounds normal, doesn’t it, even to their having the kind of Airedale you had then? Well, it all seemed normal enough to us, and they soon got to be part of the crowd. You know, the young married crowd in every suburb.
Of course, that was ’28 and the boom was booming and everybody was feeling pretty high. I suppose that was part of it—the money—and the feeling you had that everything was going faster and faster and wouldn’t stop. Why, it was Sally herself who said that we owed ourselves a whirl and mustn’t get stodgy and settled while we were still young. Well, we had stuck pretty close to the grindstone for the past few years, with the children and everything. And it was fun to feel young and sprightly again and buy a new car and take in the club gala without having to worry about how you’d pay your house account. But I don’t see any harm in that.
And then, of course, we talked and kidded a lot about freedom and what have you. Oh, you know the kind of talk—everybody was talking it then. About not being Victorians and living your own life. And there was the older generation and the younger generation. I’ve forgotten a lot of it now, but I remember there was one piece about love not being just a form of words mumbled by a minister, but something pretty special. As a matter of fact, the minister who married us was old Doctor Snell and he had the kind of voice you could hear in the next county. But I used to talk about that mumbling minister myself. I mean, we were enlightened, for a suburb, if you get my point. Yes, and pretty proud of it, too. When they banned a book in Boston, the lending library ordered six extra copies. And I still remember the big discussion we had about perfect freedom in marriage when even the straight Republicans voted the radical ticket. All except Chick Bewleigh, and he was a queer sort of bird, who didn’t even believe that stocks had reached a permanently high plateau.
But, meanwhile, most of us were getting the 8:15 and our wives were going down to the chain store and asking if that was a really nice head of lettuce. At least that’s the way we seemed. And, if the crowd started kidding me about Mary Sennett, or Mac Church kissed Sally on the ear at a club revel, why, we were young, we were modern, and we could handle that. I wasn’t going to take a shotgun to Mac, and Sally wasn’t going to put on the jealous act. Oh, we had it all down to a science. We certainly did.
Good Lord, we had the Blakes to dinner, and they had us. They’d drop over for drinks or we’d drop over there. It was all perfectly normal and part of the crowd. For that matter, Sally played with Jim Blake in the mixed handicap and they got to the semifinals. No, I didn’t play with Lisa—she doesn’t like golf. I mean that’s the way it was.
And I can remember the minute it started, and it wasn’t anything, just a party at the Bewleighs’. They’ve got a big, rambling house and people drift around. Lisa and I had wandered out to the kitchen to get some drinks for the people on the porch. She had on a black dress, that night, with a big sort of orange flower on it. It wouldn’t have suited everybody, but it suited her.
We were talking along like anybody and suddenly we stopped talking and looked at each other. And I felt, for a minute, well, just the way I felt when I was first in love with Sally. Only this time, it wasn’t Sally. It happened so suddenly that all I could think of was, “Watch your step!” Just as if you’d gone into a room in the dark and hit your elbow. I guess that makes it genuine, doesn’t it?
We picked it up right away and went back to the party. All she said was, “Did anybody ever tell you that you’re really quite a menace, Dan?” and she said that in the way we all said those things. But, all the same, it had happened. I could hear her voice all the way back in the car. And yet, I was as fond of Sally as ever. I don’t suppose you’ll believe that, but it’s true.
And next morning, I tried to kid myself that it didn’t have any importance. Because Sally wasn’t jealous, and we were all modern and advanced and knew about life. But the next time I saw Lisa, I knew it had.
I want to say this. If you think it was all romance and rosebuds, you’re wrong. A lot of it was merry hell. And yet, everybody whooped us on. That’s what I don’t understand. They didn’t really want the Painters and the Blakes to get divorced, and yet they were pretty interested. Now, why do people do that? Some of them would carefully put Lisa and me next to each other at table and some of them would just as carefully not. But it all added up to the same thing in the end—a circus was going on and we were part of the circus. It’s interesting to watch the people on the high wires at the circus and you hope they don’t fall. But, if they did, that would be interesting too. Of course, there were a couple of people who tried, as they say, to warn us. But they were older people and just made us mad.
Everybody was so nice and considerate and understanding. Everybody was so nice and intelligent and fine. Don’t misunderstand me. It was wonderful, being with Lisa. It was new and exciting. And it seemed to be wonderful for her, and she’d been unhappy with Jim. So, anyway, that made me feel less of a heel, though I felt enough of a heel, from time to time. And then, when we were together, it would seem so fine.
A couple of times we really tried to break it, too—at least twice. But we all belonged to the same crowd, and what could you do but run away? And, somehow, that meant more than running away—it meant giving in to the Victorians and that mumbling preacher and all the things we’d said we didn’t believe in. Or I suppose Sally might have done like old Mrs. Pierce, back home. She horsewhipped the dressmaker on the station platform and then threw herself crying into Major Pierce’s arms and he took her to Atlantic City instead. It’s one of the town’s great stories and I always wondered what they talked about on the train. Of course, they moved to Des Moines after that—I remember reading about their golden wedding anniversary when I was in college. Only nobody could do that nowadays, and, besides, Lisa wasn’t a dressmaker.
So, finally, one day, I came home, and there was Sally, perfectly cold, and, we talked pretty nearly all night. We’d been awfully polite to each other for quite a while before—the way you are. And we kept polite, we kept a good grip on ourselves. After all, we’d said to each other before we were married that if either of us ever—and there it was. And it was Sally who brought that up, not me. I think we’d have felt better if we’d fought. But we didn’t fight.
Of course, she was bound to say some things about Lisa, and I was bound to answer. But that didn’t last long and we got our grip right back again. It was funny, being strangers and talking so politely, but we did it. I think it gave us a queer kind of pride to do it. I think it gave us a queer kind of pride for her to ask me politely for a drink at the end, as if she were in somebody else’s house, and for me to mix it for her, as if she were a guest.
Everything was talked out by then and the house felt very dry and empty, as if nobody lived in it at all. We’d never been up quite so late in the house, except after a New Year’s party or when Buddy was sick, that time. I mixed her drink very carefully, the way she liked it, with plain water, and she took it and said “Thanks.” Then she sat for a while without saying anything. It was so quiet you could hear the little drip of the leaky faucet in the pantry, in spite of the door being closed. She heard it and said, “It’s dripping again. You better call up Mr. Vye in the morning—I forgot. And I think Barbara’s getting a cold—I meant to tell you.” Then her face twisted and I thought she was going to cry, but she didn’t.
She put the glass down—she’d only drunk half her drink—and said, quite quietly, “Oh, damn you, and damn Lisa Blake, and damn everything in the world!” Then she ran upstairs before I could stop her and she still wasn’t crying.
I could have run upstairs after her, but I didn’t. I stood looking at the glass on the table and I couldn’t think. Then, after a while, I heard a key turn in a lock. So I picked up my hat and went out for a walk—I hadn’t been out walking that early in a long time. Finally, I found an all-night diner and got some coffee. Then I came back and read a book till the maid got down—it wasn’t a very interesting book. When she came down, I pretended I’d gotten up early and had to go into town by the first train, but I guess she knew.
I’m not going to talk about the details. If you’ve been through them, you’ve been through them; and if you haven’t, you don’t know. My family was fond of Sally, and Sally’s had always liked me. Well, that made it tough. And the children. They don’t say the things you expect them to. I’m not going to talk about that.
Oh, we put on a good act, we put on a great show! There weren’t any fists flying or accusations. Everybody said how well we did it, everybody in town. And Lisa and Sally saw each other, and Jim Blake and I talked to each other perfectly calmly. We said all the usual things. He talked just as if it were a case. I admired him for it. Lisa did her best to make it emotional, but we wouldn’t let her. And I finally made her see that, court or no court, he’d simply have to have Sylvia. He was crazy about her, and while Lisa’s a very good mother, there wasn’t any question as to which of them the kid liked best. It happens that way, sometimes.
For that matter, I saw Sally off on the train to Reno. She wanted it that way. Lisa was going to get a Mexican divorce—they’d just come in, you know. And nobody could have told, from the way we talked in the station. It’s funny, you get a queer bond, through a time like that. After I’d seen her off—and she looked small in the train—the first person I wanted to see wasn’t Lisa, but Jim Blake. You see, other people are fine, but unless you’ve been through things yourself, you don’t quite understand them. But Jim Blake was still in Meadowfield, so I went back to the club.
I hadn’t ever really lived in the club before, except for three days one summer. They treat you very well, but, of course, being a college club, it’s more for the youngsters and the few old boys who hang around the bar. I got awfully tired of the summer chintz in the dining room and the Greek waiter I had who breathed on my neck. And you can’t work all the time, though I used to stay late at the office. I guess it was then I first thought of getting out of Spencer Wilde and making a new connection. You think about a lot of things at a time like that.
Of course, there were lots of people I could have seen, but I didn’t much want to—somehow, you don’t. Though I did strike up quite a friendship with one of the old boys. He was about fifty-five and he’d been divorced four times and was living permanently at the club. We used to sit up in his little room—he’d had his own furniture moved in and the walls were covered with pictures—drinking Tom Collinses and talking about life. He had lots of ideas about life, and about matrimony, too, and I got quite interested, listening to him. But then he’d go into the dinners he used to give at Delmonico’s, and while that was interesting, too, it wasn’t much help, except to take your mind off the summer chintz.
He had some sort of small job, downtown, but I guess he had an income from his family too. He must have. But when I’d ask him what he did, he’d always say, “I’m retired, my boy, very much retired, and how about a touch more beverage to keep out the sun?” He always called it beverage, but they knew what he meant at the bar. He turned up at the wedding, when Lisa and I were married, all dressed up in a cutaway, and insisted on making us a little speech—very nice it was too. Then we had him to dinner a couple of times, after we’d got back, and somehow or other, I haven’t seen him since. I suppose he’s still at the club—I’ve got out of the habit of going there, since I joined the other ones, though I still keep my membership.
Of course, all that time, I was crazy about Lisa and writing her letters and waiting till we could be married. Of course I was. But, now and then, even that would get shoved into the background. Because there was so much to do and arrangements to make and people like lawyers to see. I don’t like lawyers very much, even yet, though the people we had were very good. But there was all the telephoning and the conferences. Somehow, it was like a machine—a big machine—and you had to learn a sort of new etiquette for everything you did. Till, finally, it got so that about all you wanted was to have the fuss over and not talk about it any more.
I remember running into Chick Bewleigh in the club, three days before Sally got her decree. You’d like Chick—he’s the intellectual type, but a darn good fellow too. And Nan, his wife, is a peach—one of those big, rangy girls with a crazy sense of humor. It was nice to talk to him because he was natural and didn’t make any cracks about grass-bachelors or get that look in his eye. You know the look they get. We talked about Meadowfield—just the usual news—the Bakers were splitting up and Don Sikes had a new job and the Wilsons were having a baby. But it seemed good to hear it.
“For that matter,” he said, drawing on his pipe, “we’re adding to the population again ourselves. In the fall. How we’ll ever manage four of them! I keep telling Nan she’s cockeyed, but she says they’re more fun than a swimming pool and cost less to keep up, so what can you do!”
He shook his head and I remembered that Sally always used to say she wanted six. Only now it would be Lisa, so I mustn’t think about that.
“So that’s your recipe for a happy marriage,” I said. “Well, I always wondered.”
I was kidding, of course, but he looked quite serious.
“*Kinder, Küchen und Kirche?*” he said. “Nope, that doesn’t work any more, what with pre-schools, automats and the movies. Four children or no four children, Nan could still raise hell if she felt like raising hell. And so could I, for that matter. Add blessings of civilization,” and his eyes twinkled.
“Well then,” I said, “what is it?” I really wanted to know.
“Oh, just bull luck, I suppose. And happening to like what you’ve got,” he answered, in a sort of embarrassed way.
“You can do that,” I said. “And yet——”
He looked away from me.
“Oh, it was a lot simpler in the old days,” he said. “Everything was for marriage—church, laws, society. And when people got married, they expected to stay that way. And it made a lot of people as unhappy as hell. Now the expectation’s rather the other way, at least in this great and beautiful nation and among people like us. If you get a divorce, it’s rather like going to the dentist—unpleasant sometimes, but lots of people have been there before. Well, that’s a handsome system, too, but it’s got its own casualty list. So there you are. You takes your money and you makes your choice. And some of us like freedom better than the institution and some of us like the institution better, but what most of us would like is to be Don Juan on Thursdays and Benedick, the married man, on Fridays, Saturdays and the rest of the week. Only that’s a bit hard to work out, somehow,” and he grinned.
“All the same,” I said, “you and Nan——”
“Well,” he said. “I suppose we’re exceptions. You see, my parents weren’t married till I was seven. So I’m a conservative. It might have worked out the other way.”
“Oh,” I said.
“Yes,” he said. “My mother was English, and you may have heard of English divorce laws. She ran away with my father and she was perfectly right—her husband was a very extensive brute. All the same, I was brought up on the other side of the fence, and I know something about what it’s like. And Nan was a minister’s daughter who thought she ought to be free. Well, we argued about things a good deal. And, finally, I told her that I’d be very highly complimented to live with her on any terms at all, but if she wanted to get married, she’d have to expect a marriage, not a trip to Coney Island. And I made my point rather clear by blacking her eye, in a taxi, when she told me she was thinking seriously of spending a week end with my deadly rival, just to see which one of us she really loved. You can’t spend a romantic week end with somebody when you’ve got a black eye. But you can get married with one and we did. She had raw beefsteak on it till two hours before the wedding, and it was the prettiest sight I ever saw. Well, that’s our simple story.”
“Not all of it,” I said.
“No,” he said, “not all of it. But at least we didn’t start in with any of this bunk about if you meet a handsomer fellow it’s all off. We knew we were getting into something. Bewleigh’s Easy Guide to Marriage in three installments—you are now listening to the Voice of Experience, and who cares? Of course, if we hadn’t—ahem—liked each other, I could have blacked her eye till doomsday and got nothing out of it but a suit for assault and battery. But nothing’s much good unless it’s worth lighting for. And she doesn’t look exactly like a downtrodden wife.”
“Nope,” I said, “but all the same——”
He stared at me very hard—almost the way he used to when people were explaining that stocks had reached a permanently high plateau.
“Exactly,” he said. “And there comes a time, no matter what the intention, when a new face heaves into view and a spark lights. I’m no Adonis, God knows, but it’s happened to me once or twice. And I know what I do then. I run. I run like a rabbit. It isn’t courageous or adventurous or fine. It isn’t even particularly moral, as I think about morals. But I run. Because, when all’s said and done, it takes two people to make a love affair and you can’t have it when one of them’s not there. And, dammit, Nan knows it, that’s the trouble. She’d ask Helen of Troy to dinner just to see me run. Well, goodbye, old man, and our best to Lisa, of course——”
After he was gone, I went and had dinner in the grill. I did a lot of thinking at dinner, but it didn’t get me anywhere. When I was back in the room, I took the receiver off the telephone. I was going to call long distance. But your voice sounds different on the phone, and, anyway, the decree would be granted in three days. So when the girl answered, I told her it was a mistake.
Next week Lisa came back and she and I were married. We went to Bermuda on our wedding trip. It’s a very pretty place. Do you know, they won’t allow an automobile on the island?
The queer thing was that at first I didn’t feel married to Lisa at all. I mean, on the boat, and even at the hotel. She said, “But how exciting, darling!” and I suppose it was.
Now, of course, we’ve been married eight years, and that’s always different. The twins will be seven in May—two years older than Sally’s Jerry. I had an idea for a while that Sally might marry Jim Blake—he always admired her. But I’m glad she didn’t—it would have made things a little too complicated. And I like McConaghey—I like him fine. We gave them an old Chinese jar for a wedding present. Lisa picked it out. She has very good taste and Sally wrote us a fine letter.
I’d like to have you meet Lisa sometime—she’s interested in intelligent people. They’re always coming to the apartment—artists and writers and people like that.
Of course, they don’t always turn out the way she expects. But she’s quite a hostess and she knows how to handle things. There was one youngster that used to rather get in my hair. He’d call me the Man of Wall Street and ask me what I thought about Picabia or one of those birds, in a way that sort of said, “Now watch this guy stumble!” But as soon as Lisa noticed it, she got rid of him. That shows she’s considerate.
Of course, it’s different, being married to a person. And I’m pretty busy these days and so is she. Sometimes, if I get home and there’s going to be a party, I’ll just say good night to the twins and fade out after dinner. But Lisa understands about that, and I’ve got my own quarters. She had one of her decorator friends do the private study and it really looks very nice.
I had Jim Blake in there one night. Well, I had to take him somewhere. He was getting pretty noisy and Lisa gave me the high sign. He’s doing very well, but he looks pretty hard these days and I’m afraid he’s drinking a good deal, though he doesn’t often show it. I don’t think he ever quite got over Sylvia’s dying. Four years ago. They had scarlet fever at the school. It was a great shock to Lisa, too, of course, but she had the twins and Jim never married again. But he comes to see us, every once in a while. Once, when he was tight, he said it was to convince himself about remaining a bachelor, but I don’t think he meant that.
Now, when I brought him into the study, he looked around and said, “Shades of Buck Rogers! What one of Lisa’s little dears produced this imitation Wellsian nightmare?”
“Oh, I don’t remember,” I said. “I think his name was Slivovitz.”
“It looks as if it had been designed by a man named Slivovitz,” he said. “All dental steel and black glass. I recognize the Lisa touch. You’re lucky she didn’t put murals of cogwheels on the walls.”
“Well, there was a question of that,” I said.
“I bet there was,” he said. “Well, here’s how, old man! Here’s to two great big wonderful institutions, marriage and divorce!”
I didn’t like that very much and told him so. But he just wagged his head at me.
“I like you, Painter,” he said. “I always did. Sometimes I think you’re goofy, but I like you. You can’t insult me—I won’t let you. And it isn’t your fault.”
“What isn’t my fault?” I said.
“The setup,” he said. “Because, in your simple little heart, you’re an honest monogamous man, Painter—monogamous as most. And if you’d stayed married to Sally, you’d have led an honest monogamous life. But they loaded the dice against you, out at Meadowfield, and now Lord knows where you’ll end up. After all, I was married to Lisa myself for six years or so. Tell me, isn’t it hell?”
“You’re drunk,” I said.
“*In vino veritas*,” said he. “No, it isn’t hell—I take that back. Lisa’s got her damn-fool side, but she’s an attractive and interesting woman—or could be, if she’d work at it. But she was brought up on the idea of Romance with a big R, and she’s too bone-lazy and bone-selfish to work at it very long. There’s always something else, just over the horizon. Well, I got tired of fighting that, after a while. And so will you. She doesn’t want husbands—she wants clients and followers. Or maybe you’re tired already.”
“I think you’d better go home, Jim,” I said. “I don’t want to have to ask you.”
“Sorry,” he said. “*In vino veritas.* But it’s a funny setup, isn’t it? What Lisa wanted was a romantic escapade—and she got twins. And what you wanted was marriage—and you got Lisa. As for me,” and for a minute his face didn’t look drunk any more, “what I principally wanted was Sylvia and I’ve lost that. I could have married again, but I didn’t think that’d be good for her. Now, I’ll probably marry some client I’ve helped with her decree—we don’t touch divorce, as a rule, just a very, very special line of business for a few important patrons. I know those—I’ve had them in the office. And won’t that be fun for us all! What a setup it is!” and he slumped down in his chair and went to sleep. I let him sleep for a while and then had Briggs take him down in the other elevator. He called up next day and apologized—said he knew he must have been noisy, though he couldn’t remember anything he said.
The other time I had somebody in the study was when Sally came back there once, two years ago. We’d met to talk about college for Barbara and I’d forgotten some papers I wanted to show her. We generally meet downtown. But she didn’t mind coming back—Lisa was out, as it happened. It made me feel queer, taking her up in the elevator and letting her in at the door. She wasn’t like Jim—she thought the study was nice.
Well, we talked over our business and I kept looking at her. You can see she’s older, but her eyes are still that very bright blue, and she bites her thumb when she’s interested. It’s a queer feeling. Of course, I was used to seeing her, but we usually met downtown. You know, I wouldn’t have been a bit surprised if she’d pushed the bell and said, “Tea, Briggs. I’m home.” She didn’t, naturally.
I asked her, once, if she wouldn’t take off her hat and she looked at me in a queer way and said, “So you can show me your etchings? Dan, Dan, you’re a dangerous man!” and for a moment we both laughed like fools.
“Oh, dear,” she said, drying her eyes, “that’s very funny. And now I must be going home.”
“Look here, Sally,” I said, “I’ve always told you—but, honestly, if you need anything—if there’s anything——”
“Of course, Dan,” she said. “And we’re awfully good friends, aren’t we?” But she was still smiling.
I didn’t care. “Friends!” I said. “You know how I think about you. I always have. And I don’t want you to think——”
She patted my shoulder—I’d forgotten the way she used to do that.
“There,” she said. “Mother knows all about it. And we really are friends, Dan. So——”
“I was a fool.”
She looked at me very steadily out of those eyes.
“We were all fools,” she said. “Even Lisa. I used to hate her for a while. I used to hope things would happen to her. Oh, not very bad things. Just her finding out that you never see a crooked picture without straightening it, and hearing you say: ‘A bird can’t fly on one wing,’ for the dozenth time. The little things everybody has to find out and put up with. But I don’t even do that any more.”
“If you’d ever learned to put a cork back in a bottle,” I said. “I mean the right cork in the right bottle. But——”
“I do so! No, I suppose I never will.” And she laughed. She took my hands. “Funny, funny, funny,” she said. “And funny to have it all gone and be friends.”
“Is it all gone?” I said.
“Why, no, of course not,” she said. “I don’t suppose it ever is, quite. Like the boys who took you to dances. And there’s the children, and you can’t help remembering. But it’s gone. We had it and lost it. I should have fought for it more, I suppose, but I didn’t. And then I was terribly hurt and terribly mad. But I got over that. And now I’m married to Jerry. And I wouldn’t give him up, or Jerry Junior, for anything in the world. The only thing that worries me is sometimes when I think it isn’t quite a fair deal for him. After all, he could have married—well, somebody else. And yet he knows I love him.”
“He ought to,” I said rather stiffly. “He’s a darn lucky guy, if you ask me.”
“No, Dan. I’m the lucky girl. I’m hoping this minute that Mrs. Potter’s X-rays turn out all right. He did a beautiful job on her. But he always worries.”
I dropped her hands.
“Well, give him my best,” I said.
“I will, Dan. He likes you, you know. Really he does. By the way, have you had any more of that bursitis? There’s a new treatment—he wanted me to ask you——”
“Thanks,” I said, “but that all cleared up.”
“I’m glad. And now I must fly. There’s always shopping when you come in from the suburbs. Give my best to Lisa and tell her I was sorry not to see her. She’s out, I suppose.”
“Yes,” I said. “She’ll be sorry to miss you—you wouldn’t stay for a cocktail? She’s usually in around then.”
“It sounds very dashing, but I mustn’t. Jerry Junior lost one of his turtles and I’ve got to get him another. Do you know a good pet shop? Well, Bloomingdale’s, I suppose—after all, I’ve got other things to get.”
“There’s a good one two blocks down on Lexington,” I said. “But if you’re going to Bloomingdale’s——Well, goodbye, Sally, and good luck.”
“Goodbye, Dan. And good luck to you. And no regrets.”
“No regrets,” I said, and we shook hands.
There wasn’t any point in going down to the street with her, and besides I had to phone the office. But before I did, I looked out, and she was just getting into a cab. A person looks different, somehow, when they don’t know you’re seeing them. I could see the way she looked to other people—not young any more, not the Sally I’d married, not even the Sally I’d talked with, all night in that cold house. She was a nice married woman who lived in Montclair and whose husband was a doctor; a nice woman, in shopping for the day, with a new spring hat and a fifty-trip ticket in her handbag. She’d had trouble in her life, but she’d worked it out. And, before she got on the train, she’d have a black-and-white soda, sitting on a stool at the station, or maybe she didn’t do that any more. There’d be lots of things in her handbag, but I wouldn’t know about any of them nor what locks the keys fitted. And, if she were dying, they’d send for me, because that would be etiquette. And the same if I were dying. But we’d had something and lost it—the way she said—and that was all that was left.
Now she was that nice Mrs. McConaghey. But she’d never be quite that to me. And yet, there was no way to go back. You couldn’t even go back to the house in Meadowfield—they’d torn it down and put up an apartment instead.
So that’s why I wanted to talk to you. I’m not complaining and I’m not the kind of fellow that gets nerves. But I just want to know—I just want to figure it out. And sometimes it keeps going round and round in your head. You’d like to be able to tell your children something, especially when they’re growing up. Well, I know what we’ll tell them. But I wonder if it’s enough.
Not that we don’t get along well when Bud and Barbara come to see us. Especially Barbara—she’s very tactful and she’s crazy about the twins. And now they’re growing up, it’s easier. Only, once in a while, something happens that makes you think. I took Barbara out sailing last summer. She’s sixteen and a very sweet kid, if I say it myself. A lot of kids that age seem pretty hard, but she isn’t.
Well, we were just talking along, and, naturally, you like to know what your children’s plans are. Bud thinks he wants to be a doctor like McConaghey and I’ve no objection. I asked Barbara if she wanted a career, but she said she didn’t think so.
“Oh, I’d like to go to college,” she said, “and maybe work for a while, afterwards, the way mother did, you know. But I haven’t any particular talents, dad. I could kid myself, but I haven’t. I guess it’s just woman’s function and home and babies for me.”
“Well, that sounds all right to me,” I said, feeling very paternal.
“Yes,” she said, “I like babies. In fact, I think I’ll get married pretty young, just for the experience. The first time probably won’t work, but it ought to teach you some things. And then, eventually, you might find somebody to tie to.”
“So that’s the way it is with the modern young woman?” I said.
“Why, of course,” she said. “That’s what practically all the girls say—we’ve talked it all over at school. Of course, sometimes it takes you quite a while. Like Helen Hastings’ mother. She just got married for the fourth time last year, but he really is a sweet! He took us all to the matinee when I was visiting Helen and we nearly died. He’s a count, of course, and he’s got the darlingest accent. I don’t know whether I’d like a count, though it must be fun to have little crowns on your handkerchiefs like Helen’s mother. What’s the matter, daddy? Are you shocked?”
“Don’t flatter yourself, young lady—I’ve been shocked by experts,” I said. “No, I was just thinking. Suppose we—well, suppose your mother and I had stayed together? How would you have felt about it then?”
“But you didn’t, did you?” she said, and her voice wasn’t hurt or anything, just natural. “I mean, almost nobody does any more. Don’t worry, daddy. Bud and I understand all about it—good gracious, we’re grown up! Of course, if you and mother had,” she said, rather dutifully, “I suppose it would have been very nice. But then we’d have missed Mac, and he really is a sweet, and you’d have missed Lisa and the twins. Anyhow, it’s all worked out now. Oh, of course, I’d rather hope it would turn out all right the first time, if it wasn’t too stodgy or sinister. But you’ve got to face facts, you know.”
“Face facts!” I said. “Dammit, Barbara!”
Then I stopped, because what did I have to say?
Well, that’s the works, and if you’ve got any dope on it, I wish you’d tell me. There are so few people you can talk to—that’s the trouble. I mean everybody’s very nice, but that’s not the same thing. And, if you start thinking too much, the highballs catch up on you. And you can’t afford that—I’ve never been much of a drinking man.
The only thing is, where does it stop, if it does? That’s the thing I’m really afraid of.
It may sound silly to you. But I’ve seen other people—well, take this Mrs. Hastings, Barbara talked about. Or my old friend at the club. I wonder if he started in, wanting to get married four times. I know I didn’t—I’m not the type and you know it.
And yet, suppose, well, you do meet somebody who treats you like a human being. I mean somebody who doesn’t think you’re a little goofy because you know more about American Can than who painted what. Supposing, even, they’re quite a lot younger. That shouldn’t make all the difference. After all, I’m no Lothario. And Lisa and I aren’t thinking of divorce or anything like that. But, naturally, we lead our own lives, and you ought to be able to talk to somebody. Of course, if it could have been Sally. That was my fault. But it isn’t as if Maureen were just in the floor show. She’s got her own specialty number. And, really, when you get to know her, she’s a darned intelligent kid.